README.md, before:

# prox
[![Build Status](https://travis-ci.org/vigoo/prox.svg?branch=master)](https://travis-ci.org/vigoo/prox)
[![codecov](https://codecov.io/gh/vigoo/prox/branch/master/graph/badge.svg)](https://codecov.io/gh/vigoo/prox)
[![Apache 2 License License](http://img.shields.io/badge/license-APACHE2-blue.svg)](http://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0)
[![Latest version](https://index.scala-lang.org/vigoo/prox/prox/latest.svg)](https://index.scala-lang.org/vigoo/prox/prox)
![Maven central](https://img.shields.io/maven-central/v/io.github.vigoo/prox_2.12.svg?style=flat-square)

**prox** is a small library that helps you starting system processes and redirecting their input/output/error streams,
either to files, [fs2](https://github.com/functional-streams-for-scala/fs2) streams or each other.

It works by first defining a one or more processes then starting them, getting a set of **running processes**.

## Usage

[API reference](https://vigoo.github.io/prox/latest/api/io/github/vigoo/prox/index.html)

### Getting started

Add the following dependency:

```scala
libraryDependencies += "io.github.vigoo" %% "prox" % "0.1.1"
```

Let's start by defining a single process with the `Process` constructor, taking a command and optionally a list of arguments and a working directory:

```scala
import cats.implicits._
import io.github.vigoo.prox._
import io.github.vigoo.prox.syntax._

val process = Process("echo", List("Hello world"))
```

This is just a definition of a process, no real effect happened yet. We can *start* this process by using the `start` method on it, which creates an *effectful operation* in the IO monad, defined by [cats-effect](https://github.com/typelevel/cats-effect):

```scala
import scala.concurrent.ExecutionContext.Implicits.global

val runningProcess: IO[RunningProcess] = process.start
```

This, when executed, will start the above defined process and return an instance of `RunningProcess`, which allows things like waiting for the process to be terminated, or kill it. 

Let's see a full example of running the above process and printing it's exit code!

```scala
val program = 
    for {
      echo <- Process("echo", List("Hello world")).start
      result <- echo.waitForExit()
    } yield result.exitCode
    
val exitCode = program.unsafeRunSync()
``` 

### Redirection
Let's take a look at the type of `process` we defined above:

```scala
process: Process[NotRedirected, NotRedirected, NotRedirected]
```

The three type parameters indicate the redirection status of the processes *input*, *output* and *error* streams. The default is that they are *not redirected*, inheriting the parent processes streams.

Each stream can be redirected **at most once** using the `<`, `>` and `redirectErrorTo` operators. The target of these redirections are described by three type classes: `CanBeProcessOutputTarget`, `CanBeProcessErrorTarget` and `CanBeProcessInputSource`.

One type with such instances is `Path`. Let's how to redirect the output:

```scala
import io.github.vigoo.prox.path._

val process = Process("echo", List("Hello world")) > (home / "tmp" / "out.txt")
``` 

Running this process will redirect the process' output to the given file directly using the *Java process builder API'. We can't use this operator twice as it would be ambigous (and outputting to multiple files directly is not supported by the system), so the following does not typecheck:

```scala
val process = Process("echo", List("Hello world")) > (home / "tmp" / "out.txt") > (home / "tmp" / "out2.txt")
```

Similarly we can redirect the input and the error:

```scala
val p1 = Process("cat") < (home / "something")
val p2 = Process("make") redirectErrorTo (home / "errors.log")
```

### Streams
**[fs2](https://github.com/functional-streams-for-scala/fs2) streams** of bytes can be used as *inputs* for processes in the same way:

```scala
import fs2._

val source = Stream("Hello world").through(text.utf8Encode)
val printSource = Process("cat") < source
```

Similarly the output can be redirected to a **pipe** as following:

```scala
val captured = Process("cat") < source > identity[Stream[IO, Byte]]
```

Calling `start` on a process which has its streams connected to [fs2](https://github.com/functional-streams-for-scala/fs2) streams sets up the *IO operation* and starts all the involved *streams* asynchronously.

The default type classes implement the following behavior depending on the target:

- If the target is a `Sink`, the stream is started by `run` and the result type is `Unit`
- If the pipe's output is `Out` and there is a `Monoid` instance for `Out`, the stream is started by `runFoldMonoid` and the result type is `Out`
- Otherwise if the pipe's output is `Out`, the stream is started by `runLog` and the result type is `Vector[Out]`  

For example to send a string through `cat` and capture the output:

```scala
val source = Stream("Hello world").through(text.utf8Encode)
val program: IO[String] = for {
  runningProcess <- (Process("cat") < source > text.utf8Decode[IO]).start
  result <- runningProcess.waitForExit()
} yield result.fullOutput
```

There are three wrappers for pipes to customize this behavior without implementing an own instance of `CanBeOutputTarget[T]`:

- `Ignore(pipe)` results in running the stream with `run`, having a result of `Unit`
- `Log(pipe)` results in running the stream with `runLog` even if `Out` is a `Monoid`, having a result of `Vector[Out]`
- `Fold(pipe, init: Res, f: (Res, Out) => Res)` results in running the stream with `runFold(init)(f)`, having a result of `Res`  

### Piping
The library also provides a way to **pipe two or more processes together**. This is implemented by the *stream support* above internally.

Let's start by piping two processes together:

```scala
val echoProcess = Process("echo", List("This is an output"))
val wordCountProcess = Process("wc", List("-w"))
val combined = echoProcess | wordCountProcess
```

The combined process is no longer a `Process`; it is a `PipedProcess`, but otherwise it works exactly the same, you can redirect its input and outputs or pipe it to another process:

```scala
val multipleProcesses = Process("cat", List("log.txt")) | Process("grep", List("ERROR")) | Process("sort") | Process("uniq", List("-c"))
```

The `start` method for piped processes no longer returns a single `IO[RunningProcess]`, but a *tuple* containing all the `RunningProcess`
instances for the involved processes:

```scala
for {
  runningProcs1 <- (echoProcess | wordCountProcess).start
  (echo, wordCount) = runningProcs1
  
  runningProcs2 <- multipleProcesses.start
  (cat, grep, sort, uniq) = runningProcs2
  
  _ <- wordCount.waitForExit()
  _ <- uniq.waitForExit()
} yield ()
```

The pipe between the two process can be customized with the followin syntax:


```scala
val customPipe: Pipe[IO, Byte, Byte] = ???
val process = echoProcess.via(customPipe).to(wordCountProcess)
```

Commit message:

Update to cats-effect 1.0 and fs2 1.0

README.md, after:

# prox
[![Build Status](https://travis-ci.org/vigoo/prox.svg?branch=master)](https://travis-ci.org/vigoo/prox)
[![codecov](https://codecov.io/gh/vigoo/prox/branch/master/graph/badge.svg)](https://codecov.io/gh/vigoo/prox)
[![Apache 2 License License](http://img.shields.io/badge/license-APACHE2-blue.svg)](http://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0)
[![Latest version](https://index.scala-lang.org/vigoo/prox/prox/latest.svg)](https://index.scala-lang.org/vigoo/prox/prox)
![Maven central](https://img.shields.io/maven-central/v/io.github.vigoo/prox_2.12.svg?style=flat-square)

**prox** is a small library that helps you starting system processes and redirecting their input/output/error streams,
either to files, [fs2](https://github.com/functional-streams-for-scala/fs2) streams or each other.

It works by first defining a one or more processes then starting them, getting a set of **running processes**.

## Usage

[API reference](https://vigoo.github.io/prox/latest/api/io/github/vigoo/prox/index.html)

### Getting started

Add the following dependency:

```scala
libraryDependencies += "io.github.vigoo" %% "prox" % "0.2.0"
```

Let's start by defining a single process with the `Process` constructor, taking a command and optionally a list of arguments and a working directory:

```scala
import cats.implicits._
import io.github.vigoo.prox._
import io.github.vigoo.prox.syntax._

val process = Process("echo", List("Hello world"))
```

This is just a definition of a process, no real effect happened yet. We can *start* this process by using the `start` method on it, which creates an *effectful operation* in the IO monad, defined by [cats-effect](https://github.com/typelevel/cats-effect):

```scala
implicit val contextShift: ContextShift[IO] = IO.contextShift(ExecutionContext.global)
val blockingExecutionContext = ExecutionContext.fromExecutor(Executors.newCachedThreadPool())

val runningProcess: IO[RunningProcess] = process.start(blockingExecutionContext)
```

This, when executed, will start the above defined process and return an instance of `RunningProcess`, which allows things like waiting for the process to be terminated, or kill it. 

Let's see a full example of running the above process and printing it's exit code!

```scala
val program = 
    for {
      echo <- Process("echo", List("Hello world")).start(blockingExecutionContext)
      result <- echo.waitForExit()
    } yield result.exitCode
    
val exitCode = program.unsafeRunSync()
``` 

### Redirection
Let's take a look at the type of `process` we defined above:

```scala
process: Process[NotRedirected, NotRedirected, NotRedirected]
```

The three type parameters indicate the redirection status of the processes *input*, *output* and *error* streams. The default is that they are *not redirected*, inheriting the parent processes streams.

Each stream can be redirected **at most once** using the `<`, `>` and `redirectErrorTo` operators. The target of these redirections are described by three type classes: `CanBeProcessOutputTarget`, `CanBeProcessErrorTarget` and `CanBeProcessInputSource`.

One type with such instances is `Path`. Let's how to redirect the output:

```scala
import io.github.vigoo.prox.path._

val process = Process("echo", List("Hello world")) > (home / "tmp" / "out.txt")
``` 

Running this process will redirect the process' output to the given file directly using the *Java process builder API'. We can't use this operator twice as it would be ambigous (and outputting to multiple files directly is not supported by the system), so the following does not typecheck:

```scala
val process = Process("echo", List("Hello world")) > (home / "tmp" / "out.txt") > (home / "tmp" / "out2.txt")
```

Similarly we can redirect the input and the error:

```scala
val p1 = Process("cat") < (home / "something")
val p2 = Process("make") redirectErrorTo (home / "errors.log")
```

### Streams
**[fs2](https://github.com/functional-streams-for-scala/fs2) streams** of bytes can be used as *inputs* for processes in the same way:

```scala
import fs2._

val source = Stream("Hello world").through(text.utf8Encode)
val printSource = Process("cat") < source
```

Similarly the output can be redirected to a **pipe** as following:

```scala
val captured = Process("cat") < source > identity[Stream[IO, Byte]]
```

Calling `start` on a process which has its streams connected to [fs2](https://github.com/functional-streams-for-scala/fs2) streams sets up the *IO operation* and starts all the involved *streams* asynchronously.

The default type classes implement the following behavior depending on the target:

- If the target is a `Sink`, the stream is started by `drain` and the result type is `Unit`
- If the pipe's output is `Out` and there is a `Monoid` instance for `Out`, the stream is started by `fold` and the result type is `Out`
- Otherwise if the pipe's output is `Out`, the stream is started by `toVector` and the result type is `Vector[Out]`  

For example to send a string through `cat` and capture the output:

```scala
val source = Stream("Hello world").through(text.utf8Encode)
val program: IO[String] = for {
  runningProcess <- (Process("cat") < source > text.utf8Decode[IO]).start(blockingExecutionContext)
  result <- runningProcess.waitForExit()
} yield result.fullOutput
```

There are three wrappers for pipes to customize this behavior without implementing an own instance of `CanBeOutputTarget[T]`:

- `Drain(pipe)` results in running the stream with `drain`, having a result of `Unit`
- `ToVector(pipe)` results in running the stream with `toVector` even if `Out` is a `Monoid`, having a result of `Vector[Out]`
- `Fold(pipe, init: Res, f: (Res, Out) => Res)` results in running the stream with `runFold(init)(f)`, having a result of `Res`  

### Piping
The library also provides a way to **pipe two or more processes together**. This is implemented by the *stream support* above internally.

Let's start by piping two processes together:

```scala
val echoProcess = Process("echo", List("This is an output"))
val wordCountProcess = Process("wc", List("-w"))
val combined = echoProcess | wordCountProcess
```

The combined process is no longer a `Process`; it is a `PipedProcess`, but otherwise it works exactly the same, you can redirect its input and outputs or pipe it to another process:

```scala
val multipleProcesses = Process("cat", List("log.txt")) | Process("grep", List("ERROR")) | Process("sort") | Process("uniq", List("-c"))
```

The `start` method for piped processes no longer returns a single `IO[RunningProcess]`, but a *tuple* containing all the `RunningProcess`
instances for the involved processes:

```scala
for {
  runningProcs1 <- (echoProcess | wordCountProcess).start(blockingExecutionContext)
  (echo, wordCount) = runningProcs1
  
  runningProcs2 <- multipleProcesses.start(blockingExecutionContext)
  (cat, grep, sort, uniq) = runningProcs2
  
  _ <- wordCount.waitForExit()
  _ <- uniq.waitForExit()
} yield ()
```

The pipe between the two process can be customized with the followin syntax:


```scala
val customPipe: Pipe[IO, Byte, Byte] = ???
val process = echoProcess.via(customPipe).to(wordCountProcess)
```

### Controlling the execution context
There are two parameters controlling the execution of the processes. 

- The implicit `ContextShift[IO]` is used for all the async operations necessary for running the involved streams in parallel. See [cats-effect's concurrency basics](https://typelevel.org/cats-effect/concurrency/basics.html) for more information.
- A specific blocking `ExecutionContext` has to be provided in the process `start` method. This will be used to run the blocking IO of reading and writing the process streams. See [fs2-s migration guide to 1.0](https://github.com/functional-streams-for-scala/fs2/blob/series/1.0/docs/migration-guide-1.0.md#fs2io-changes) for more information. 

## Migration

### from 0.1.x to 0.2

- The `start` method on processes now requires a `blockingExecutionContext` argument
- `Ignore` has been renamed to `Drain`
- `Log` has been renamed to `ToVector`
